---
layout: post
title: Using PDO
description: Interfacing with a database for PHP web development.
category: Development
tags: database development php
---
PHP Data Objects (PDO) is a database access layer providing a more secure and
uniform interface for accessing and altering data within databases. Where most
programmers learn to connect to MySQL databases with the MySQL or MySQLi
extensions that can be prone to several security pitfalls, such as SQL
injection, PDO provides methods to create prepared statements, which clean
dynamic user input thus preventing the same security risks that the older
extensions suffer from.

PDO offers an abstraction to many database engines, but requires a driver in
order to connect to each of them. As such PDO cannot perform any database
interactions by itself, but there are quite a few drivers already available to
interface with popular database engines. Regardless of which database engine is
being used, PDO abstracts the programmer from the underlying logic and uses the
same functions to issue queries and fetch data; it's just simply a case of
switching the driver being used.

## Connecting to a Database

I use a try/catch block approach when connecting to a database. This is because
PDO throws exceptions when errors occur. I believe this is a better approach
then using many if statements to determine the cause of the problem. To connect
to a MySQL database a new PDO object needs to be created, passing to it the
driver to be used, in this case `mysql`, followed by the hostname of the
machine hosting the database and the credentials used to access it.

Here I have also included an array of settings which includes only the argument
to make connections to the MySQL database persistent. This ensures a constant
connection to the database that can improve performance when there is a lot of
traffic creating frequent connection requests. However this does not come
without downfalls (depending upon the situation of course). Two main concerns
that can occur whilst using persistent connections are:

* **Transactions**: Having a persistent connection means that an Apache process
  considers all MySQL queries as part of that same transaction. This is bad if
  MySQL never issues a commit or a rollback because if something were to happen
  during a transaction some data may be lost. This can be solved by creating a
  `register_shutdown_function()` that does a database rollback.

* **Threads**: Also since there will only be a limited number of MySQL
  connections open at a time, there has to be enough database threads available
  to serve all these request. The best way around this is to ensure that there
  are always slightly more database threads than Apache threads to prevent
  Apache from blocking when trying to connect to MySQL more times then there
  are threads.

Lastly I have set attributes on the connection to always fire exceptions when
an error occurs. This is so error can be handled more gracefully.

{% highlight php %}
  try {
    $dbconn = new PDO("mysql:host=localhost;dbname=dbname", username, password, array(PDO::ATTR_PERSISTENT => true));
    $dbconn->setAttribute(PDO::ATTR_ERRMODE, PDO::ERRMODE_EXCEPTION);
  } catch(PDOException $e) {

    // If the connection was unsuccessful then print
    // out to the user this fact and kill the script.
    file_put_contents("PDOErrors.log", $e->getMessage(), FILE_APPEND);

    // header ( 'HTTP/1.1 500 Internal Server Booboo' );
    header("Content-Type: application/json");
    die(json_encode(array("message" => "Failed to connect to the database. Please try again.", code => 500)));
  }
{% endhighlight %}

In the catch block I have printed out the error to a file on the server in
which this code is run, so that I can see what has gone wrong, whilst a more
user friendly message is sent back to the client in a JSON formatted object so
that it can be dealt with appropriately.

## Querying the Database

When querying the database, I have used prepared statements to avoid such
technical problems as SQL injection. Prepared statements escape the values that
have been passed to it before issuing the query. Note in the code below that
the MySQL statement has a placeholder within it that starts with a colon and
will be replaced with an escaped value before the query is executed.

If placeholders have been used, it is then necessary to replace them. The
`bindParam` method is responsible for this. This method can also be used to
dictate what datatype should be expected and throw an error if this condition
is not met.

{% highlight php %}
  try {
    $dbstat = $dbconn->prepare("INSERT INTO Table(Value) VALUES(:value)");
    $dbstat->bindParam(":value", $_POST['value'], PDO::PARAM_STR);
    $dbstat->execute();
  } catch(PDOException $e) {

    // If the query was unsuccessful, probably due to email
    // address duplication, then print out to the user this
    // fact and kill the script.
    file_put_contents("PDOErrors.log", $e->getMessage(), FILE_APPEND);

    // header ( 'HTTP/1.1 400 Naughty Request' );
    header("Content-Type: application/json");
    die(json_encode(array("message" => "Email already registered.", code => 400)));
  }
{% endhighlight %}

As before, in the catch block I have printed out the error to a file on the
server in which this code is run, so that I can see what has gone wrong. A JSON
encoded object is also sent back to the client to be dealt with appropriately.
