---
layout: post
title: Netflix and Chill - Part 3
description: Building your own Netflix and chill button tutorial series concluding with assembly.
author: Tomas Basham
comments: true
category: Product Design
tags: 3d-printing netflix technology
---
If you have been following along with this tutorial series you should have a
working [electronic
prototype](/product%20design/2016/05/12/netflix-and-chill.html) with the
necessary [code](/product%20design/2016/05/15/netflix-and-chill-part-2.html) to
turn on your TV and signal an external messaging queue to later extend the
functionality of your switch using a Raspberry Pi or other internet enabled
device.

In this final part of the tutorial series I will conclude with the assembly.
This I found to be the most time consuming step and where I most often had to
go back to the "drawing board".

It is worth noting that the [original
files](http://makeit.netflix.com/downloads/build_step6_SwitchModels.zip) posted
by Netflix are in a very awkward format. They seem to have been modelled in
SolidWorks 2016, and unless you have a small fortune or happen to work with
this product you will be unable to open these files. Fortunately my
[brother](https://www.linkedin.com/in/daniel-basham-99557a65) is a product
designer and uses this particular version at his place of employment. I have
had him edit the models to accomodate my own design changes and export them in
a much more compatible format. The models can be found
[here](https://github.com/tomasbasham/netflix-switch-models/tree/master).

### Chassis and Backplate

The chasis will house the electronics from [part
1](/product%20design/2016/05/12/netflix-and-chill.html) preventing bits from
rattling around when we finally put everything together. You can build this
from any material that you like but I opted for plastic. More specifically I
had this part 3D printed in Polylactic Acid (PLA) biodegradable thermoplastic
with a 100 micron layer height. Since I do not yet own a 3D printer I had this
printed though the [3D Hubs](https://www.3dhubs.com) service. The turnaround
time can vary depending upon the local printing house you choose but I received
a very professional, good quality print that I was very happy with.

I used the same service to print the backplate that will keep the chassis
within the outer enclosure. You can get a copy of these printed yourself using
this [quick
link](http://www.thingiverse.com/apps/3d-print-with-3d-hubs/run?thing_id=1743817)
however you are limited to the filament colour options and the printing house.
Instead I'd clone the repo linked to above and manually submit the print job to
3D Hubs.

<p class="embed-container">
  <script src="https://embed.github.com/view/3d/tomasbasham/netflix-switch-models/master/netflix-switch-chassis.stl"></script>
  <script src="https://embed.github.com/view/3d/tomasbasham/netflix-switch-models/master/netflix-switch-backplate.stl"></script>
</p>

### Enclosure

The enclosure envelops all the circuitry and the chassis, having the backplate
securely fasten to its rear end. It is this part that gives the switch it's
finished look. I had originally intended to get this made from solid Oak and
have it milled using a CNC milling machine. There are a few online services
where you can have this made, operating similarly to 3DHubs, however everyone I
contacted ignored my requests. So as a backup plan I had this printed too from
PLA through 3DHubs.

For reference the site I attempted to use was [Fabhub](https://www.fabhub.io/),
a global network of professional fabricators making digital designs, on demand,
all over the world. You may have more luck than I did but it would appear the
order size is too small for any of the fabricators to deem worth their time.

This design almost mirrors that which was originally put together by the
Netflix team. I have merged the logo and the chassis into one solid piece, and
I have lengthened the recess under the logo to accommodate the LED Backlight.

<p class="embed-container">
  <script src="https://embed.github.com/view/3d/tomasbasham/netflix-switch-models/master/netflix-switch-enclosure.stl"></script>
</p>

### Assembly

Due to the physical dimensions of the enclosure, assembly is no easy feat.
First and foremost there are going to be a lot of wires living inside this box.
I first attempted soldering each of the LEDs to their respective resistors,
transistors and wires essentially making many little circuits that I could
piece together.

![Netflix Switch Wires](https://cdn.tomasbasham.co.uk/netflix-switch-wires.jpg)

Quickly realising this was far too fiddly I instead opted to create my own PCB
for the lighting array that comprises of the 5 indicator lights and the LED
Backlight. Although this has not reduced the number of wires by a lot, it
allows me to securely fasten down all of the lights to the enclosure and have a
neat block of wires extending from the board to the Spark Photon.

I have uploaded the [gerber files](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gerber_format)
to [OSH Park](https://oshpark.com/) where they will print the exact same board
for you for around Â£8 (for 3 boards - minimum order). This is incredibly cheap
and will definitely mitigate a lot of frustration whilst assembling.

[![Order from OSH Park](https://oshpark.com/assets/badge-5b7ec47045b78aef6eb9d83b3bac6b1920de805e9a0c227658eac6e19a045b9c.png)](https://oshpark.com/shared_projects/wV6vJPb5)

After receiving the boards I used a technique called [hotplate
reflow](/electronics/2016/06/06/tricks-of-the-trade-hotplate-reflow.html) to
attach some surface mount resistors I had lying around. These are the same
value resistors as in the prototype but just far more compact as to make the
electronics take up as little room as possible.

As for everything else it is a matter of following the prototype we made in a
previous article and hooking it up to both the power supplied through the LiPo
battery and the Spark Photon development board.

### Conclusion

Finally having come to the end of this tutorial series you should have created
your own Netflix switch capable of controlling your TV and potentially sending
message to a remote message broker.

In future I intend to revisit making the enclosure out of wood as I feel it
will give it a far better finish, but until then I am happy with the results.
